Hello there.
In this video, we're going to have an overview of concurrency. So this is basically going to look
at some of the points made in previous videos in a little bit more detail. At the application level,
concurrency can be done by having lots of separate programs representing different activities, which
is single threading, or it can have one single executing program in which all the activities are performed,
some of them at the same time, or even maybe all of them at the same time.
And that's multi threading.
Single threaded concurrency is the oldest and the original, a separate process for each activity,
which has its own execution path through the source code, which is also known as a thread.
So if you imagine you have the program's source code and you have a little...
Is it the Greek legend with the Minotaur? He had the thread and he found his way out of the maze.
So this is how the program traces its way through the maze of the program's code.
So in single threading, each program only has one thread.
There's just one way: to start at the beginning, go through to the end and then stop.
Each process also has its own private memory space, so it's not possible for another process to directly
access the data inside a process.
We start up a new process for each activity so they can run concurrently.
That's organized by the operating system.
We start up a new process for each activity and the operating system will take care and make sure they
run concurrently.
If any of our activities need to exchange data or communicate in some way with each other, this will
need some kind of interprocess communication.
And there are various ways of doing that: message
queue, pipe,  semaphore, shared memory, network socket,  file handles and so on.
If we have a very simple system where we have one program that does lots of computations, that take a
long time and make it unresponsive, and we want to be able to display an hourglass just to let the
user know that we haven't forgotten them, then this program will need to start up a separate program
to display the hourglass.
It will also need to provide some kind of communication channel so it can tell the hourglass to stop, then
when the data cruncher has finished crunching its data, it will send a message to the hourglass and
the hourglass will stop running and the data cruncher can start reacting again.
Each process has its own private space and cannot accidentally interfere with another process's data.
A good feature of this is that process can be run on different computers, communicating over a network, so
you can have a computer that is dedicated to a particular activity.
Creating new processes can be slow on some systems.
Interprocess communication adds complexity and can be slow to set up, and if you are working in C++,
there's no direct support for this.
You have to drop down to the operating system and use whatever facilities are available, so that's
a lot of extra work and it means your program will not work if you try to run it on a different system.
With multithreaded concurrency, we have all the activities running in a single process. Each activity
has its own execution path or thread.
So you can imagine there are several different threads making their way through the program code, at the
same time, going in different directions, doing different things, or maybe even doing the same thing.
To start a new activity, we create a new thread, so that's concurrency. All the threads
share the memory space of the process they are running in.
If we make any data global in this process, then all the threads can see it and access it and modify
it.
It's also possible to pass certain types of objects between threads.
So if we go back to our data crunching example, we have one program that does everything.
So this program will start off in main() executing the main thread. When it is about to start a long computation,
it will start a new thread which will display the hourglass.
And then when this computation is finished, it will terminate the hourglass thread and it will carry
on executing.
Threads are implemented using so-called lightweight processes.
These are provided by the operating system. There is less overhead involved in creating a thread than
there is in creating a full process.
And there is also less overhead for task switching between threads because there's not so much to set
up and switch.
And sharing data and communication between threads is much easier than for processes. On the other
hand, there is a lack of data protection.
This can require careful programming.
If you're not careful, you can corrupt your data and your program will behave inconsistently.
And this is a big problem in threaded programming.
The advantages of concurrency. The program will feel more responsive: if it is doing something and
it gets busy, it will still respond to your commands.
Concurrency can improve throughput by allowing large amounts of data or computation to be done at the same
time.
Which means less time overall.
Concurrency allows logically distinct operations to be kept separate.
If you are in an e-mail program and you are composing a new message, then other threads can run to fetch
messages or perhaps archive your old messages.
And it takes full advantage of modern hardware. Threads can be distributed among processor cores,
so each thread runs on a separate core.
And that will make much better use of the power that modern computers offer us.
The disadvantages are that concurrency adds complexity to programs.
It takes more thought to write them.
They are harder to write, harder to understand, so more difficult to maintain.
And there are also types of bugs which you do not get when there is only one thing happening.
When you have multiple things happening at once, you can get issues which depend on timing, which
are very hard to debug. Concurrency
may not necessarily result in faster programs. By the time you have taken all this extra effort to
protect your shared data,
it may actually add more overhead than you are removing.
So only use it when the benefits outweigh the costs.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.